Analyze an issue1
“In raising a child, love is important, but discipline is most important of all.”

Discuss whether you agree or disagree with the statement. Use relevant reasons and examples to support your point of
view. In developing and supporting your position, consider ways in which the statement might or might not hold true.
Explain how those considerations affect your point of view.

Issue Task Sample Essay: Score of 6
The following essay received a score of 6 because it is well organized and focused, uses language effectively, and
provides an insightful in-depth analysis of a complex issue.

The issue of proper child rearing is an important, yet rarely debated, social issue, with implications affecting both
children and adults. One of the most important variables in a child-rearing philosophy is whether the philosophy values
discipline or love more highly. A philosophy that values discipline above love is one in which love may be denied for
the purpose of promoting discipline, particularly through withheld affection or through corporal punishment. Most of
today’s leading authorities recommend that discipline be valued above love for raising children, especially boys.
However, most of these commentators, such as James Dobson, base their child-rearing philosophies not on sound research
studying the happiness and social success of the children, but on one particular interpretation of religious texts.
Studies have shown that these ideas about child-rearing, far from producing happy, competent adults, in fact do serious
harm to children raised under their influence. Indeed, a child-rearing philosophy that values discipline above love
fails both a philosophical and a pragmatic test.

　　From a practical perspective, a child-rearing technique can be considered successful if the child has generally
positive memories of childhood, and goes on to be a valuable member of society, as measured through such traits as
honesty, compassion, and initiative. Most discipline-based child-rearing philosophies fail on precisely these grounds.
It needs little arguent that most children do not have happy memories of physical discipline, but the denial of
affection can also be a powerfully traumatic act: children who are told that they run the risk of losing a parent’s love
also grow up to be nervous, clingy adults, prone to pretending that problems do not exist, in lieu of risking the
alienation of affection. Further, child-rearing research has come down strongly on the side of a care-based parenting
method. Studies show that, contra Dobson et al, harsh punishment for disobedience does not create a powerful sense of
self-discipline; instead it promotes adults who are guided by punishment rather than conscience. To the contrary,
children who are raised with compassion and love(though not without a due measure of discipline) tend to behave towards
others in a compassionate and loving manner.

　　Philosophically, the discipline-based child-rearing philosophy also comes up short. Physical coercion as a valid
means of achieving one’s objectives is never a good lesson to teach. Moreover, some would argue that it is simply
morally wrong to harm a child, whether it is with the intent of promoting discipline or not; since such behavior would
not be tolerated in a  non-discipline context, there is no reason to believe it acceptable in a discipline context,
especially when there is no solid evidence that it has any beneficial effects. It is also unsatisfactory that 
strict-discipline parenting methodology presupposes the need to be even more strict and firm with male children than
with female children. Without evidence for substantial behavioral differences between male and female prepubescent
children, there is no reason to believe that their development would require radically different parenting strategies.

　　I do not with to argue that discipline should be avoided. Completely lax parenting is just as bad as domineering
parenting. However, parental discipline must always come second to love; parents must meet the physical and emotional
needs of their children, even disobedient ones, under all circumstances. The good parent, having set boundaries, can
make sure that the child is free to explore within them, and to deal adequately with the challenges beyond the home,
simply by setting the positive example of treating the child with affection, care, and respect.

　　
Issue Task Sample Essay: Score of 4
The following essay received a score of 4 because, although the ideas were supported with relevant examples, the essay
lacks focus and includes errors that reduce its overall clarity.

　　I believe that love and discipline are both important, but discipline has to be more important. Too many children
these days are raised without discipline. They do whatever they want, and don’t pay attention to the effect they have on
society. For a child to really grow up right, you have to set limits and make sure the child follows them, because
otherwise they won’t think that there ever are any limits. Nowadays we hear all kinds of stories from the media--in the
papers, on television--about the things that kids do when they grow up unsupervised. All these things could have been
prevented by a bit of discipline when that child was growing up.

　　Kids who grow up without discipline always wind up getting into trouble. Whether it’s disrespecting their parents or
their employers, to having no goals for themselves, to violent and unrestrained behavior, not having discipline heads to
problems. Sometimes undisciplined children grow into violent adults, for instance, Lyle and Erik Menendez, who killed
their parents solely to get the insurance money, clearly showed a profound lack of discipline. Their desire for material
goods was not restrained by a proper sense, of discipline that would have led them to work hard to get it. Thus, these
two wild children did the unthinkable: they killed their parents in their undisciplined search for greater material
happiness.

　　Another person who showed a remarkable lack of discipline in her life was Janet Jackson. Her crazy antics at the
super Bowl showed a remarkable lack of discipline, while it may be fun to flaunt yourself, someone with the proper
upbringing that emphasizes the importance of discipline will know better than to expose herself on national television.
She just wanted to jump-start her career without putting in the work. What she needed was more discipline.

　　In short, discipline is extremely important. A person who does not have will not go far in life, whether because of
the mistakes they make or because they will lack ambition to achieve his or her goals, and if a person does not learn
discipline in childhood, then when will they learn it? Therefore, the most important thing when raising a child is
discipline, to prevent those kinds of mistakes in adulthood.
