　　Sample Essay Prompt 2: Analyze an Issue
　　
　　“Health care in the United States should be free for all citizens, fully financed by the government”
　　
　　Issue Task Sample Essay: Score of 6
　　The following essay received a score of 6 because it is well organized and focused, uses language effectively, and provides an insightful in-depth analysis of a complex issue.
　　
　　In the United States today an atmosphere of entitlement exists that could cause one to believe that free health care for all citizens is the best course of action. Government subsidized programs such as welfare and Medicaid continue to
perpetuate the myth that all people, regardless of their actual need, should be entitled to unlimited government
assistance simply by virtue of being born in America. While I agree that American citizens who evidence a legitimate
need should receive help for such things as emergency health care, I do not believe that health care in the United
States should be free for all citizens, fully financed by the government.

　　History is replete with examples of failed states, which failed, for the most part, because they subverted the
market and created a command economy, thus limiting the role of individual choice. The most recent example is the
collapse of the Soviet Union, which proved that allocation of resources by a government bureaucracy is so inherently
inefficient as to be literally fatal to a government and many of its individual citizens.

　　While I recognize that the proposal is limited to government provided health care, it must be noted that the health
care segment represents an overwhelmingly large portion of the total economy of the United States. Furthermore, the same
weaknesses inherent in any centrally controlled economy will be found in a national system of health care.

　　It is fundamental fact that human desires are limitless while resources are limited. When the market allocates
resources via innumerable individual human decisions, it is likely that the highest overall satisfaction will be
achieved. The proper role of government is to enforce procedural fairness so that no individual member of society gains
an unfair advantage in bargaining. Once government steps into the process of actually allocating scarce resources, such
as medicine, it must introduce a decision making process that, by its nature, must be inefficient. Simply put, someone
must decide who has access to which medicine, doctors, equipment, etc. If the government were to take over a system of
payment, it would then take over such decisions.

　　I believe that such a government system would be disastrous. To paraphrase a political candidate from recent
history:”It would combine the compassion of the Internal Revenue Service with the efficiency of the Department of Motor
Vehicles.”

　　Furthermore, the concept of health care is poorly defined. Would this free service be limited to “basic” health care
or include sophisticated diagnostic services such as CAT scans and MRI’s? Where would the lines be drawn? The
opportunities for ridiculous waster are nearly limitless, as are the possibilities for abuse: Should the government
health care system pay for multiple attempts at rehabilitation for unrepentant drug abusers?

　　There is also the potential slippery slope to consider. If government takes over payment for all health care, then
it is conceivable that the government would be interested in limiting dangerous behaviors: for example, certain high
risk sports and activities such as motorcycle riding, as well as more mundane activities such as overeating. Could
government health care regulations end up requiring a state issued permit to consume a cheeseburger and a beer Perhaps.

　　Because the unintended consequences would probably be far reaching and overwhelmingly negative, I do not support the
idea that health care should be government funded and free to all citizens.
　　
　　
　　Issue Task Sample Essay: Score of 4
　　The following essay received a score of 4 because, although the ideas were supported with relevant examples, the
essay lacks focus and includes errors that reduce its overall clarity.
　　
　　In light of the current national debt situation, I disagree with the statement that health care in the United States
should be free for all citizens, and that the government should finance health care. Many other countries around the
world have government financed health care programs; the United States should see that these programs are not always
very successful.

　　For example, in a country like Canada, where health care is free to all citizens, the risk of heart disease is on
the rise. Even though every citizen has access to free health care, it is not being taken advantage of. Studies show
that people are not any healthier in a country, such as Canada, where health care is fully financed by the government.
Many people think that if health care was free, the general population would be healthier. However, based on the
previous example, it is not the case.

　　In addition, government funded health care would put a financial strain on the government. We are already paying too
much taxes, and that is the only place for the government to get the extra money it would need to pay for free health
care. This, again, shows that each citizen should be responsible for their own health care, and not rely on the
government to provide it. If we rely on the government for too much help, we learn, as a society, not to take care of
ourselves, which may reduce our current status among the other countries of the world.

　　Although some people may disagree, government financed health care is not the best action for the United States. As
free citizens, we should be responsible for our own well-being.
