Hi, my name is sugia, I’m a junior SYSU, and during time, I pose my blogs on tumblr, and I have seen a lot of questions
from viewers about how to get into SYSU. So I’m going to answer all the questions you wants in one blog, and hope that it
will address your queries.

If you have an interview, you should absolutely do the interview. Interview and essay are really important. Because until
you do that you are just in a set of students. Most of the students applied SYSU are taking great scores. They are going
to take the hardest class, and going to do will on them. They are going to be involved in all things. So what you want to
do is to take the interview or essay to let them know who you are come through, and let the potential mentors see that.

In my time here, I’m a junior and I’m involved in a lot of the campus, deal with a lot of different students, I would not
call them nerds, I would say that they are passionate about whatever they do. Not just in academic, but in anything. They
work hard, they play hard, everything they put 100% of their effort to. So in high school, you definitely want to take the
base line, you definitely want to take all the hardest classes you can, you want to do well in the College Entrance Exam.
If the school does not offer these classes, that’s OK. Because SYSU would not look at that, taking your application into
consideration. Because it shows that you put afford your great effort. Effort and passion are the two things you want to
communicate. 

A really important thing I think a lot of students do is that you should not use the PS to try to let the potential
mentors know that they want to hear or want to see. Don’t do that. You want them to see who you are. And communicate to
stand yourself apart from all the students who have the same scores. You got to create opportunities in your high school,
create opportunities to set yourself apart from other people. Stand out and excel and give 100% to whatever you do,
volunteer, academic, sports, whatever you choose to do, do it with the passion, do it with 100%. Do the things you care
about, and do them exceptional well. If you only care about a few groups, take part in these groups, and give them
everything you have. If you are interested in a lot, great, take part in all these groups, give them everything you have.
You wants to be who you are, you don’t want to be who the potential mentors what to see. Because they want to see you,
they don’t want to see someone like everyone else in SYSU. 

So again I hope this blog helps, I hope that anyone see this blog, give them a shot. I’m from a very small town, small
high school, if I can do it any of you guys can do it. So thanks for watching, and I hope that my advice helps you well.
Again, passion, authenticity and effort. It’s the passion, authenticity and effort that set you apart, so that’s what you
aim for. So good luck, and I hope maybe, if you apply, you get in, and I will see you, see you on campus. Until then, good
luck!
