As people rely more and more on technology to solve problems, the ability of humans to think for themselves will surely
deteriorate.

Discuss the extent to which you agree or disagree with the statement and explain your reasoning for the position you
take. In developing and supporting your position, you should consider ways in which the statement might or might not
hold true and explain how these considerations shape your position.


Score 6 Response
The statement linking technology negatively with free thinking plays on recent human experience over the past century.
Surely there has been no time in history where the lived lives of people have changed more dramatically. A quick
reflection on a typical day reveals how technology has revolutionized the world. Most people commute to work in an
automobile that runs on an internal combustion engine. During the workday, chances are high that the employee will
interact with a computer that processes information on silicon bridges that are .09 microns wide. Upon leaving home,
family members will be reached through wireless networks that utilize satellites orbiting the earth. Each of these
common occurences would have been inconceivable at the turn of the 19th century.

　　The statement attempts to bridge these dramatic changes to a reduction in the ability for humans to think for
themselves. The assumption is that an increased reliance on technology negates the need for people to think creatively
to solve previous quandaries. Looking back at the introduction, one could argue that without a car, computer, or mobile
phone, the hypothetical worker would need to find alternate methods of transport, information processing, and 
communication. Technology short circuits this thinking by making the problems obsolete.

　　However, this reliance on technology does not necessarily preclude the creativity that marks the human species. The
prior examples reveal that technology allows for convenience. The car, computer, and phone all release additional time
for people to live more efficiently. This efficiency does not preclude the need for humans to think for themselves. In
fact, technology frees humanity to not only tackle new problems, but may itself create new issues that did not exist
without technology. For example, the proliferation of automobiles has introduced a need for fuel conservation on a
global scale. With increasing energy demands from emerging markets, global warming becomes a concern inconceivable to
the horse-and-buggy generation. Likewise dependence on oil has created nation-states that art not dependent on taxation,
allowing ruling parties to oppress minority groups such as women. Solutions to these complex problems require the
unfettered imaginations of maverick scientists and politicians.

　　In contrast to the statement, we can even see how technology frees the human imagination. Consider how the digital
revolution and the advent of the internet has allowed for an unprecedented exchange of ideas. WebMD, a popular internet
portal for medical information, permits patients to self research symptoms for a more informed doctor visit. This
exercise opens pathways of thinking that were previously closed off to the medical layman. With increased 
interdisciplinary interactions, inspiration can arrive from the most surprising corners. Jeffrey Sachs, one of the
architects of the UN Millenium Development Goals, based his ideas on emergency care triage techniques. The unlikely
marriage of economics and medicine has healed tense, hyperinflation environments from South America to Eastern Europe.

　　This last example provides the most hope in how technology actually provides hope to the future of humanity. By
increasing our reliance on technology, impossible goals can now be achieved. Consider how the late 20th century
witnessed the complete elimination of smallpox. This disease had ravaged the human race since prehistorical days, and
yet with the technology of vaccines, free thinking humans dared to imagine a world free of smallpox. Using technology,
battle plans were drawn out, and smallpox was systematically targeted and eradicated.

　　Technology will always mark the human experience, from the discovery of fire to the implementation of 
nanotechnology. Given the history of the human race, there will be no limit to the number of problems, both new and old,
for us to tackle. There is no need to retreat to a Luddite attitude to new things, but rather embrace a hopeful posture
to the possibilities that technology provides for new avenues of human imagination.


Score 5 Response
Surely many of us have expressed the following sentiment, or some variation on it, during our daily commutes to 
work:”People are getting so stupid these days!” Surrounded as we are by striding and strident automations with cell
phones glued to their ears, PDA’s gripped in their palms, and omniscient, omnipresent CNN gleaming in their eyeballs,
it’s tempting to believe that technology has isolated and infantilized us, essentially transforming us into dependent,
conformist morons best equipped to sideswipe one another in our SUV’s.

　　Furthermore, hanging around with the younger, pre-commute generation, whom tech-savviness seems to have rendered
lethal, is even less reassuring. With “Teen People” style trends shooting through the air from tiger-striped PDA to
zebra-striped PDA, and with the latest starlet gossip zipping from juicy Blackberry to teeny, turbo-charged cell phone,
technology seems to support young people’s worst tendencies to follow the crowd. Indeed, they have seemingly evolved
into intergalactic conformity police. After all, today’s tech-aided teens are, courtesy of authentic, hands-on video
games, literally trained to kill; courtesy of chat and instant text messaging, they have their own language; they even
have tiny cameras to efficiently photo document your fashion blunders! Is this adolescence, or paparazzi terrorist
training camp?

　　With all this evidence, it’s easy to believe that tech trends and the incorporation of technological wizardry into
our everyday lives have served mostly to enforce conformity, promote dependence, heighten comsumerism and materialism,
and generally create a culture that values self-absorption and personal entitlement over cooperation and collaboration.
However, I argue that we are merely in the inchoate stages of learning to live with technology while still loving one
another. After all, even given the examples provided earlier in this essay, it seems clear that technology hasn’t
impaired our thinking and problem-soling capacities. Certainly it has incapacitated our behavior and manners; certainly
our values have taken a severe blow. However, we are inarguably more efficient in our badness these days. We’re
effective worker bees of ineffectiveness!

　　If technology has so increased our senses of self-efficacy that we can become veritable agents of the awful, virtual
CEO’s of selfishness, certainly it can be beneficial. Harnessed correctly, technology can improve our ability to think
and act for ourselves. The first challenge is to figure out how to provide technology users with some direly-needed
direction.


Score 4 Response
In all actuality, I think it is more probable that our bodies will surely deteriorate long before our minds do in any
significant amount. Who can’t say that technology has made us lazier, but that’s the key word, lazy, not stupid. The
ever increasing amount of technology that we incorporate into our daily lives makes people think and learn every day,
possibly more than ever before. Our abilities to think, learn, philosophize, etc. May even reach limits never dreamed of
before by average people. Using technology to solve problems will continue to help us realize our potential as a human
race.

　　If you think about it, using technology to solve more complicating problems gives humans a chance to expand their
thinking and leaning, opening up whole new worlds for many people. Many of these people are glad for the chance to
expand their horizons by learning more, going to new places, and trying new things. If it wasn’t for the invention of
new technological devices, I wouldn’t be sitting at this computer trying to philosophize about technology. It would be
extremely hard for children in much poorer countries to learn and think for themselves with out the invention of the
internet. Think what an impact the printing press, a technologically superior machine at the time, had on the ability of
the human race to learn and think.

　　Right now we are seeing a golden age of technology, using it all the time during our every day lives. When we get up
there’s instant coffee and the microwave and all these great things that help us get ready for our day. But we aren’t
allowing our minds to deteriorate by using them, we are only making things easier for ourselves and saving time for
other important things in our days. Going off to school or work in our cars instead of a horse and buggy. Think of the
brain power and genius that was used to come up with that single invention that has changed the way we move across this
globe.

　　Using technology to solve our continually more complicated problems as a human race is definitely a good thing. Our
ability to think for ourselves isn’t deteriorating, it’s continuing to grow, moving on to higher though functions and
more ingenious ideas. The ability to use what technology we have is an example.
